# Ch 14
- BSS and ESS
- The distributed system connecting aps in BSSs are wired LAN .It can be Ethernet.
- Eg, of ESS,The idea is similar to communication in a
 cellular network if we consider each BSS to be a cell and each AP to be a base station.
-   extended service set uses two types ofstations: mobile and stationary.
- mobile station
- IEEE 802.11 defines three types of stations based on their mobility(network coverage) in a wireless LAN:
 no-transition, BSS·transition, and ESS-transition mobility.
1. **no-transition:** A station with no-transition  mobility is either stationary (not moving) or moving only inside a BSS. 
2. **BSS-transition mobility** can move from one BSS to another, but the movement is con
fined inside one ESS.
3. A station with **ESS-transition mobility** canmove from one ESS to
 another.

## MAC Sublayer
-  IEEE 802.11 defines two MAC sublayers: the distributed coordination function (DCF)
 and point coordination function (PCF).
1. **distributed coordination function (DCF)**
-  DCF uses CSMA/CA  as the
 access method.
- Wireless LANs cannot implementCSMAfCD for three reasons:(IMP)
1.  For collision detection a station must be able to send data and receive collision
 signals at the same time. This can mean costly stations and increased bandwidth
 requirements
2.  Collision may not be detected because of the **hidden station problem**. We will discuss
 this problem later in the chapter
3.  The distance between stations can be great. Signal fading could prevent a station at
 one end from hearing a collision at the other end.
- CSMA/CA in DCF(read from book and ppt)
- RTS:Station requesting another station to receive the frame
- CTS:Receiver is ready to receive from sender

**Network Allocation Vector:** 
- It helps other stations to alert that one station occupied the channel for transmission.
-  When a station sends an RTS frame, it includes the duration oftime that it needs to
 occupy the channel. 
- The stations that are affected by this transmission create a timer
 called a network allocation vector (NAV) that shows how much time must pass before
 these stations are allowed to check the channel for idleness.
- In simple whats the station cheques if the NAV is expired before checking the transmission medium.

**Collision During Handshaking**
-  Two or more stations may try to send RTS frames at the same time. These control frames
 may collide.
- However, because there is no mechanism for collision detection,
-  the sender
 assumes there has been a collision ifit has not received a CTS frame from the receiver.
 The back-offstrategy is employed, and the sender tries again

2. **Point Coordination Function (PCP)**
-  The point coordinationfunction (PCF) is an optional access method that can be imple
mented in an infrastructure network (not in an ad hoc network). 
-  It is implemented on top
 of the DCF and is used mostly for time-sensitive transmission.

- Here polling access method is used just like in dcp we used csma/ca.
-  PCF has a centralized, contention-free polling access method. 
- The AP performs
 polling for stations that are capable of being polled. 
- The stations are polled one after
 another, sending any data they have to the AP.
- PCF ensures timely and predictable transmission by using controlled access through a polling mechanism instead of random access in DCF. Hence given more priority than DCF.
- To give priority to PCF over DCF, another set of interframe spaces has been
 defined: PIFS and SIFS.
-  The SIFS is the same as that in DCF, but the PIFS (PCFIFS) is
 shorter than the DIFS.(Recall higher priority tasks have given lesser interframe space)
-  Due to the priority of PCF over DCF, stations that only use DCF may not gain
 access to the medium. 
-  To prevent this, a **repetition** interval has been designed to cover
 both contention-free (PCF) and contention-based (DCF) traffic. 
-  The repetition interval,
 which is repeated continuously, starts with a special control frame, called a **beacon frame**.
- When the stations hear the beacon frame, they start their NAV for the duration of the
 contention-free period of the repetition interval.

- **Fragmentation:** the division of a large frame into smaller ones.
 
## Frame Format
-  The MAC layer frame consists of nine fields, as shown in Figure 14.7.
1.  **Frame control (FC):**  The FC field is 2 bytes long and defines the type of frame and
 some control information.
2. **D:** defines the duration ofthe transmission
 that is used to set the value of NAV.In one control frame, this field defines the ID
 of the frame
3. **Addresses:** There are four address fields, each 6 bytes long. The meaning of each
 address field depends on the value of the To DS and From DS subfields and will be
 discussed later.
4. **Sequence control:** This field defines the sequence number of the frame to be used in flow control.
5.  **Framebody:** This field, which can be between 0 and 2312 bytes, contains information based on the type and the subtype defined in the FC field
6. **FCS:** The FCS field is 4 bytes long and contains a CRC-32 error detection sequence.

**Frame Types**
1. **Management Frames:** Management frames are used for the initial communication
 between stations and access points
2. **Control Frames:** Control frames are used for accessing the channel and acknowledging frames.Figure14.8 shows the format.
-  Values of subfields in control frames
3. **DataFrames:** Dataframes are used for carrying data and control information.

## **Addressing Mechanism**
- The IEEE 802.11 addressing mechanism specifies four cases, defined by the value of the two flags in the FC field, To DS and From DS. 
- Each flag can be either 0 or I, resulting in four different situations. The 
- address 1 is always the address of the next device. Address 2 is always the address of the previous device. Address 3 is the address of the final destination station if it is not defined by address I. Address 4 is the address of the original source station if it is not the same as address 2.
- Case4:11 In this case, To DS=1 and From DS=1.
 This is the case in which the distri
bution system is also wireless. T

## Hidden and Exposed Station Problems
1. **Hidden Station Problem**
-  Hidden stations can reduce the capacity of the network because ofthe
 possibility of collision.
- The solution to the hidden station problem is the use ofthe handshake frames (RTS
 and CTS) that we discussed earlier. 
- However, because both Band C are within the range ofA, the
 CTS message, which contains the duration ofdata transmission from B to A reaches C.
 Station C knows that some hidden station is using the channel and refrains from
 mitting until that duration is over.
- The CTS frame in CSMA/CA  handshake can prevent collision
 from a hidden station.
2.  **Exposed Station Problem**
- station A is transmitting to station B.
 Station C has some data to send to station D, which can be sent without interfering
 with the transmission fromA to B. However, station C is exposed to transmission from
 A; it hears what A is sending and thus refrains from sending. In other words, C is too
 conservative and wastes the capacity ofthe channel.
-  The handshaking messages RTS and CTS cannot help in this case,

- Physical Layer(Later)

## Bluetooth
-  Bluetooth LAN is an ad hoc network, which means that the
 network is formed spontaneously among peripheral devices; the devices, sometimes called gadgets, find each
 other and make a network called a **piconet**.
- A Bluetooth LAN, by nature, can
not be large. If there are many gadgets that try to connect, there is chaos.
-  Bluetooth technology is the implementation of a protocol defined by the
 IEEE 802.15 standard.

## Architecture of Bluetooth
-  Bluetooth defines two types of networks: piconet and scatternet.
1. **Piconets**
-  A Bluetooth network is called a piconet, or a small net. 
- A piconet can have up to eight
 stations, one of which is called the primary;and the rest are called secondaries.
- All the
 secondary stations synchronize their clocks and hopping sequence with the primary.
-  a piconet can have only one primary station.
- The communication between the
 primary and the secondary can be one-to-one or one-to-many.
- Although a piconet can have a maximum ofseven secondaries, while other
 secondaries can be in the **parked state**. 
- A secondary in a parked state is synchronized
 with the primary, but cannot take part in communication until it is moved from the
 parked state. 
2. **Scatternet**
-  Piconets can be combined to form what is called a scatternet. 
- A secondary station in
 one piconet can be the primary in another piconet. 
- Hence, it has a tree like structure

##  Bluetooth Layers
1.  **Radio Layer**
-  The radio layer is roughly equivalent to the physical layer ofthe Internet model. Bluetooth
 devices are low-power and have a range of 10 m.

**Band**
- Bluetooth uses a 2.4-GHz ISM band divided into 79 channels of 1MHz each
- **ISM** stands for industrial, scientific, and medical, and refers to a group of radio frequency (RF) bands set aside for use by scientific, medical, and industrial devices

**FHSS**
-  Bluetooth uses the frequency-hopping spread spectrum (FHSS) method in the phys
ical layer to avoid interference from other devices or other networks.
- Bluetooth
 hops 1600 times per second, which means that each device changes its modulation fre
quency 1600 times per second. 

**Modulation**
- To transform bits to a signal, Bluetooth uses a sophisticated version of FSK, called
 GFSK (FSK with Gaussian bandwidth filtering; a discussion ofthis topic is beyond the
 scope ofthis book).
- GFSK has a carrier frequency.
- Bit 1 is represented by a frequency
 deviation above the carrier; bit 0 represented by a frequency deviation below the
 carrier.
- The frequencies, in megahertz, are defined according to the following formula
 for each channel
-  For example, the first channel uses carrier frequency 2402 MHz (2.402 GHz), and the
 second channel uses carrier frequency 2403 MHz (2.403 GHz)
3. **Baseband Layer**
-  The baseband layer is roughly equivalent to the MAC sublayer in LANs.
-  The access
 method is TDMA 
-  Bluetooth uses a form of TDMA (see Chapter 12) that is called TDD-TDMA (time
division duplex TDMA). 
- TDD-TDMA is a kind of half-duplex communication in
 which the secondary and receiver send and receive data, but not at the same time (half
duplex); however, the communication for each direction uses different hops. 


